Docs for logging, events, and diagnostics (#2787)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/miscellaneous/events/interception.md

---
title: Interceptors - EF Core
description: Interception for database operations and other events
author: ajcvickers
ms.date: 10/08/2020
uid: core/miscellaneous/events/interception
---

# Interceptors

> Entity Framework Core (EF Core) interceptors enable interception, modification, and/or suppression of EF Core events. This includes low-level database operations such as executing a command, as well as higher-level events, such as calls to SaveChanges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Entity Framework Core (EF Core) interceptors enable interception, modification, and/or suppression of EF Core operations. This includes low-level database operations such as executing a command, as well as higher-level ones such as calls to SaveChanges.
```

(because events mean .NET events which are also a thing)

Interceptors are different from logging and diagnostics in that they allow modification or suppression of the operation being intercepted. [Simple logging](xref:core/miscellaneous/events/simple-logging) or [Microsoft.Extensions.Logging](xref:core/miscellaneous/events/extensions-logging) are better choices for logging.

> Interceptors are registered per DbContext instance when the context is configured. Use a [diagnostic listener](xref:core/miscellaneous/events/diagnostics) to get the same information but for all DbContext instances in the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interceptors are registered per DbContext instance when the context is configured. Use a [diagnostic listener](xref:core/miscellaneous/events/diagnostics) to get the same information but for all context instances in the process.
```

Reviewer: See also other uses of DbContext below.

Interceptors are often stateless, which means that a single interceptor instance can be used for all DbContext instances. For example:

<!--
public class TaggedQueryCommandInterceptorContext : BlogsContext
{
    private static readonly TaggedQueryCommandInterceptor _interceptor 
        = new TaggedQueryCommandInterceptor();

    protected override void OnConfiguring(DbContextOptionsBuilder optionsBuilder) 
        => optionsBuilder.AddInterceptors(_interceptor);
}
-->
[!code-csharp[RegisterStatelessInterceptor](../../../../samples/core/Miscellaneous/CommandInterception/Program.cs?name=RegisterStatelessInterceptor)]

Every interceptor instance must implement one or more interface derived from <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.IInterceptor>. Each instance should only be registered once even if it implements multiple interception interfaces; EF Core will route events for each interface as appropriate.

## Database interception

> [!NOTE]
> Database interception was added in EF Core 3.0 and is only available for relational database providers.
> Savepoint support was added in EF Core 5.0.

> Low-level database interception is split into the three interfaces shown in the following table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Low-level database interception is split into the three interfaces shown in the following table:
```

Author: Should this really be a colon when referring to a table?

| Interceptor                                                            | Database operations intercepted
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------

> | <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.IDbCommandInterceptor> | Creating commands</br>Executing commands</br>Command failures</br>Disposing the command DataReader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.IDbCommandInterceptor> | Creating commands</br>Executing commands</br>Command failures</br>Disposing the command's DbDataReader
```

| <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.IDbConnectionInterceptor> | Opening and closing connections</br>Connection failures
| <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.IDbTransactionInterceptor> | Creating transactions</br>Using existing transactions</br>Committing transactions</br>Rolling back transactions</br>Creating and using savepoints</br>Transaction failures

The base classes <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.DbCommandInterceptor>, <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.DbConnectionInterceptor>, and <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.DbTransactionInterceptor> contain no-op implementations for each method in the corresponding interface. Use the base classes to avoid the need to implement unused interception methods.

> The methods on each interceptor type come in pairs; one called before the database operation is started; the other called after the operation has completed. For example, <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.DbCommandInterceptor.ReaderExecuting%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> is called before a query is executed, and <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.DbCommandInterceptor.ReaderExecuted%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> is called after query has been sent to the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The methods on each interceptor type come in pairs, with the first being called before the database operation is started, and the second after the operation has completed. For example, <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.DbCommandInterceptor.ReaderExecuting%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> is called before a query is executed, and <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.DbCommandInterceptor.ReaderExecuted%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> is called after query has been sent to the database.
```

        {
            command.CommandText += " OPTION (ROBUST PLAN)";
        }
    }
}
-->
[!code-csharp[TaggedQueryCommandInterceptor](../../../../samples/core/Miscellaneous/CommandInterception/TaggedQueryCommandInterceptor.cs?name=TaggedQueryCommandInterceptor)]

Notice:

* The interceptor inherits from <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Diagnostics.DbCommandInterceptor> to avoid having to implement every method in the interceptor interface.
* The interceptor implements both sync and async methods. This ensures that the same query hint is applied to sync and async queries.
* The interceptor implements the `Executing` methods which are called by EF Core with the generated SQL _before_ it is sent to the database. Contrast this with the `Executed` methods, which are called after the database call has returned.

Running the code in this example generates the following when a query is tagged:

```sql
-- Use hint: robust plan

SELECT [b].[Id], [b].[Name]
FROM [Blogs] AS [b] OPTION (ROBUST PLAN)
```

On the other hand, when a query is not tagged, then it is sent to the database unmodified:

```sql
SELECT [b].[Id], [b].[Name]
FROM [Blogs] AS [b]
```

> ### Example: Connection interception for SQL Azure authentication using ADD

Reviewer: This is obviously useful for people, but I'm worried we're showing a perf anti-pattern here (basically what I wrote [here](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/13124#issuecomment-709901961)).

Is it really considered good practice to fetch AAD access tokens *every time* a connection is opened? Isn't it possible to cache these for at least a while?

Reviewer: Confirmed with Azure.Identity that perf-wise this is problematic, see https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/13261#issuecomment-714923330

The sample also contains a second DbContext and model used for the auditing database.

<!--
public class AuditContext : DbContext
{
    private readonly string _connectionString;

    public AuditContext(string connectionString)
    {
        _connectionString = connectionString;
    }

    protected override void OnConfiguring(DbContextOptionsBuilder optionsBuilder)
        => optionsBuilder.UseSqlite(_connectionString);

    public DbSet<SaveChangesAudit> SaveChangesAudits { get; set; }
}

public class SaveChangesAudit
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public Guid AuditId { get; set; }
    public DateTime StartTime { get; set; }
    public DateTime EndTime { get; set; }
    public bool Succeeded { get; set; }
    public string ErrorMessage { get; set; }

    public ICollection<EntityAudit> Entities { get; } = new List<EntityAudit>();
}

public class EntityAudit
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public EntityState State { get; set; }
    public string AuditMessage { get; set; }

    public SaveChangesAudit SaveChangesAudit { get; set; }
}
-->
[!code-csharp[AuditContext](../../../../samples/core/Miscellaneous/SaveChangesInterception/AuditContext.cs?name=AuditContext)]

> #### The interceptor

Reviewer: Consider moving this up before the actual code sample of the interceptor

Author: I don't understand which part you want moving to where...

The general idea for auditing with the interceptor is:

> * An audit message is created at the beginning of SaveChanges and is written to the auditing database

Reviewer: Just out of curiosity: this makes two database audit operations for each operation (one to insert before, one to update after). Any reason not to just do one after (unless you're trying to show both methods :smile:)

Author: Because I want there to be a record even if the power goes out between the first and the second. But it doesn't matter much; it's just to demonstrate interceptors.
